1. -- % of world's population uses --% of world's resources.
12, 60
2. the relationship between environmental degradation and economic growth is called a -- curve.
Kuznet 
3. Control and ownership of Crown Lands and natural resources in the southern part of Canada is.
Provincial
4. What percentage of Aichi Biodiversity targets were reached between 2011 and 2020.
0%
5. Wind is an example of perpetual resource.
True
6. The Anthropocene reflects the dominant influence of humans on planetary processes.
True
7. The marine living planet index has declined more than any other realm since 1970.
False
8. Which is the greatest contribution to our human ecological footprint.
Carbon.
10. where is the greatest primary productivity, least productivity in water, and why?
Near the coast (shallow, warm full of nutrients) . deep ocean (least), low nutrients because they sink down.
11. Where is the greatest primary on land?
(near equator) tropical rainforest.
12. Define specialist and generalist species. Example of each.
Generalist species, broad niches and can adapt more readily to environmental change example cayotes. Specialist species, narrow niches and are more SUSceptible to environmental changexample pandas. 
13. Canada's only endangered species?
Vancouver Island Marmot
14. Why are tropical rainforests so diverse?
High moisture, High solar energy, high moisture, positive feedback loop, and co-evolution and mutualism.
15. Where is the greatest Spatial disparity in oceans?
Along the coasts where rivers and estuaries connect to the ocean.
16. What are autotrophs?
Organisms that can capture energy and generate matter.
17. When was the biggest drop in Capelin population?
1995 
18. Most biodiverse area in Canada?
Montane Cordillera 
20. The law of Entropy is that energy can neither be created nor destroyeTrue or False.
False
21. What do you call easy to harness energy?
High quality energy
22. How do we measure the rate of productivity?
Kilocalories/meters squared/year
23. Humans take 40% of NPP (net primary productivity)/Year.
24. What are Niche's made up of?
Physical, Chemical and Biological Characteristics
25. Realized Niche is the Actual range a species occupy.
True
26. Optimal Foraging Theory is when a predator goes and hunts for prey. True or False.
False
27. An example of Canada's keystone species.
Beaver
29. Endemic species are found in only one areTrue or False.
True
30. Organisms that can capture energy from the sun and manufacture matter are called?
Autotrophs
31. Two species using the same resources ad different spatial and/or temporals scales is called?
Resource partitioning
32. Which ecosystem has the highest net primary productivity?
Swamps and marshes.
33. What is the percentage of energy assimilated from one trophic level to the next?
10%
34. What is the percentage of energy assimilated from one trophic level to the next is lost?
90% 
35. The clown fish is an example of a species that lives in a mutualistic relationship with sea anemones? True or False.
True
36. Beavers are an example of Canadians keystone species? True or False.
True
37. Tropical rain forests are incredibly resilient because of their soils are rich in nutrients? True or False.
False
38. Atrophic cascade is the pressure put on to lower predators by apex predators.
True
39. Heat and energy are Limiting factors? True or False
False
40. State three reasons why only 10% of available energy is assimilated at each tropic level.
Not all that is consumed is digestedictsort
Not all that is ingested is digested
Not all biomass is converted for the next level. 
Through cellular respiration energy is lost as heat.
41. List three scales which we can measure biodiversity?
Genetic Diversity,
Species Diversity, 
Ecosystem Diversity
42. List three reasons why tropical rainforests are so diverse?
Been around for a long time
High input from sun and moisture
Coevolution and Mutualism.
Positive feedback loop
1. Lichens are an example of a(n)
Primary Colonizer
Secondary Colonizer
Alien invasive species.
Parasitic Species.
2. Each stage in ecological succession is called a(n) stage
Biotic
Ecotone
Endemic
Seral
3. An edaphic climax community is primarily determined by:
Soil geology
Moisture
Insolation
Temperature
4. A k-selected species is characterized by producing lots of young that have no parental care.
False
5. An ecotone often has Higher biodiversity than the comminutes on either side
True
6. The intermediate disturbance hypothesis states that ecosystems subject to moderate disturbance generally maintain high levels of biodiversity.
True
7. (3 mark) Explain the difference between positive and negative feedback and give an example of each.
Answer: Positive feedback enhances change or exacerbates the problem. Negative feedback works to suppress or moderate the changRemoving a Otter from an environment, or Beavers. Changes away from its original community structurNegative feedback therefore works to maintain ecosystem stability by contracting positive feedback loops. Not about good, but a positive amount of differenc
8. (3 mark) Define ecological succession and explain the main difference between primary and secondary succession.
Answer: Primary succession: colonization and occupation of a previously unvegetated surfacSecondary succession: same processes but starts on surfaces that have already been vegetatePrimarry succession is a lot longer.
9. (3 marks) List three implications of maintaining an early succession ecosystem.
Agriculture.
Productivity is often higher
Nutrient cycling is more rapid
Biodiversity reduced
Affects specialized species at high trophic levels
Usually benefits pioneer species. 
10. The main storage reservoir for nitrogen is the?
Atmosphere
11. Most of the water in Canada flows?
North
12. Which organisms are most sensitive to a lowering freshwater pH due to acid precipitation?
Crustaceans.
13. The process during which decomposing biomass is converted back into simple nitrogen compounds such as ammonia is called nitrogen fixation
False
14. Carbon dioxide gas constitutes only 0.03% of the atmosphere but it's the main reservoir for the carbon that is the building block for life.
True
15. Manitoba produces the most Sulphur oxide emissions in Canada?
True
16. List three human impacts on the phosphors cycles.
Removing the P from the oceans.
Minding for fertilizer and detergent.
Concentrating numbers of domestic organisms
removing biomass.
17. Explain the process of eutrophication 
Excessive phosphorus and nitrogen in aquatic systems -> explosive plant growth -> plants die and are decomposed by bacteria -> depletes oxygen-> Eutrophication
18. Explain the process that leads to the oxygen sag curve in a freshwater river.
fig 5.14 'Active decomposition' is the "sag" curve
ELI5: Plants that are growing from wastes, the bacteria grows in population and uses oxygen, and oxygen depletes, species like fish need that oxygen.
19. The specific characteristics of time and place need to be considered in natural resource management decision-making requires?
custom-designed solutions (biophysical, economic, social, legal, and political, are the specific characteristics)
20. Due to preoccupation with debt reduction, governments have been?
1. Downloading environmental responsibilities to lower levels of government. 2. Commercializing environmental services. 3. Privatizing environmental services.
21. The more anthropocentric nature of the ecosystem approach challenges the typical biocentric approach of traditional resource management? (True/False)
FalsCorrection: A more biocentric approach challenges typical anthropocentric approach
22. Many of our environmental problems have emerged after many decades, or even centuries. It is unrealistic to assume they can be reversed or "fixed" in a few years. (True/False)
True
23. List 3 characteristics of an ecosystem approach (Most important part of this chapter) (KNOW ALL OF THEM)
Includes whole systems, not just parts of it
Focusses on the interrelationships amount the elements
Recognizes the dynamic nature of the ecosystem
Incorporates concepts of carrying capacity, resilience and sustainability. (There are limits to human activity)
Uses broad definition of environments
Encompasses both urban and rural activities
Is based on natural geographic units rather than on political boundaries.
Embraces all levels of activity: local, regional, national and international.
24. Name and define three types of vision. (KNOW ALL OF THEM)
Catalytic Serves as a prompt or stimulus to create vision.
Legitimized Created through political processes involving key resources and negotiating sought image.
Articulated Very general vision statement to be understood.
25. Define and give an example of Environmental Justice.
"The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, color, national origin, implementation and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations and policies" (US Environmental Protection Agency, 1997)
26. Times of challenge in making choices about resource management developments are called?
Turbulent conditions.
27. Determining the probability of an environmentally or socially negative event of some specific magnitude is called?
Risk assessment
28. More than 50% of the Canada-United states border passes through shared water bodies, such as rivers and lakes? (True/False)
True
29. The decision to establish the Maple Leave processing plant in Brandon was made following multiple holder meetings in a collaborative fashion?
False
30. List three characteristics that define Stakeholders: (3 mark)
Any public agency with management responsibility
All those who significantly affected by a potential decision
All those who might participate to facilitate, block, or delay management decisions.
31. List three considerations in preparing scientific messages for the public: (3 mark)
What do we know, with what accuracy, and how confident are we about our data?
What don't we know, and why are we uncertain?
What could we know, with more time, money and talent?
What should we know in order to act in the face of uncertainty?
32. Define co-management in natural resource management and give an example where co-management has been used or is needed? (3 mark)
Primarily concerned with user-participation in decision-making and with linking communities and government managers
More lobster plan blockades planned by N.fishermen
Fairy creek, ecomanagement is needed
33. Give 3 examples of collaboration:
Sharing resources
Power sharing
Exchanging information
34. List 3 things about co-ordination:
Working together
Inter-departmental committees or task forces
transdisciplinary approaches needed 
35. List 3 things defining Stakeholders:
anyone who might participate to delay management decisions
Any public agency with management responsibility
All those are are affected by the decision 
36. Degrees of tokenism includes partnership? (True/False)
False
37. List all three degrees of tokenism:
Placation
Consultation
Information
38. What's an example of Participatory approaches?
Maple Leaf Plant Brandon, MB
39. Co-management is primarily concerned with governments making decisions however they want to? (True/Fales)
False
40. Communication is only effective when new understanding results in attitude and/or policy adjustments? (True/False)
True
41. One aspect about communication to consider is much of the public understands nature and how scientific research is conducted? (True/False)
False
42. List all considerations in preparing scientific messages:
What do we know, with what accuracy, and how confident are we about our data?
What should we know in order to act in the face of uncertainty?
What could we know with more time, money, talent, and more people?
What don't we know and why are we uncertain?
43. The Main objective in Adaptive Environmental Management is to?
Cope with the uncertain
Cope with the unexpected
Cope with the unknown
44. Adaptive management is primarily concerned with learning-by-doing in a trial-and-error fashion? (True/False)
False
45. List 3 characteristics of adaptive co-management:
Learning-by-doing
Integration of different knowledge systems.
Collaboration
Power sharing among community, regional, and national levels.
Management flexibility
46. The impact is the difference between what?
What would happen with the action and what would happen without the action.
47. Risk assessment is determining the probability of an environmentally or socially positive event of some specific magnitude? (True/False)
False
48. List 3 challenges in impact assessment:
Types of initiatives to be assessed.
When Impact assessments should be done.
Determining the significance of impacts
Inadequate understanding of ecosystems
The nature of public involvement
The development of monitoring
Sustainability assessment
49. Conflicts are desirable? (True/False)
True
50. List 3 attributes of ADR:
Emphasis on the issues and interests rather on the procedures
An outcome normally resulting in a greater commitment to the agreement
Attainment of a long-lasting settlement
Constructive communication and improved understanding
Effective use of information and experts
Increased flexibility
51. List all the specific characters of time and place that need to be considered in a custom-designed solution:
Biophysical
Economic
Social
Legal
Political
52. Visions can be developed in 3 ways by asking what 3 questions?
All of the above
What is likely to happen?
What ought to happen?
What can happen?
53. The most important question to ask from the above question is: "What ought to happen?"? (True/False)
False
54. Name 3 types of visions: (Know all of them and their meaning)
Catalytic
Legitimized
Articulated
Enacted
Routinized
Embedded
55. Articulated is a very general vision statement to be understood? (True/False)
True
56. Ecosystem approach includes only parts of the system? (True/False)
False
57. Long term view is more than 15 years?
True
58. List 5 of the major macronutrients:
Carbon
Hydrogen
Nitrogen
Oxygen
Phosphorus
59. 97% of all organic mass is made of 5 nutrients? (True/False)
True
60. Gaseous cycles are _ and sedimentary cycles are__.
Fast, slow.
Slow, fast.
Slow, slow.
Fast, fast.
61. What are 3 of the impacts humans have on the phosphorus cycle?
Mining for fertilizer leads to excessive run-off.
Removing biomass accelerates erosion
Removing Phosphorus from the oceans returns as waste
62. Is the Sulphur cycle sedimentary? (True/False)
True
63. How do humans cause eutrophication if they do in the first place?
Removal of nitrogen-rich crops leads to soil nitrogen depleted.
Nitric acid formation leads to acid rain, such like car engine emissions
64. 5% of water is left for humans to use? (True/False) 
False
65. Most of the water in Canada flows north? (True/False)
True
66. Oligotrophic (low level) has a very high species diversity? (True/False)
True
67. Which species is most sensitive to acidifying water?
Crustaceans 
68. Which of the following have the highest Sulphur oxide emissions?
Saskatchewan
Ontario
Alberta
British Columbia
69. What is the greatest contribution to nitrogen oxide?
Transportation
70. Which of the following have the highest nitrogen oxide emissions?
British Columbia
Manitoba
Ontario
Quebec
71. Primary succession happens more than once? (True/False)
False
72. The final stage for an ecosystem is:
Ecological succession
Climax community
Secondary succession
Third succession
73. Lichen is a type of secondary colonizer? (True/False)
False
74. Another word for transitions in an ecosystem is?
Ecotones
75. Disturbances are good for the environment? (True/False)
True
76. What is the primary way invasive species travel?
Ballast dumping fig 4.5
77. Positive feedback enhances or exacerbates the problem, while negative feedback works to suppress or moderate the change? (True/False)
True
78. List three examples of biotic reduction factors?
Diseases
Parasites
Predators
79. K-strategists have a very early reproductive age?
False
1. Which source contributes the greatest amount of greenhouse gasses to the atmosphere?
Electricity and heat production
2. Annual average temperatures in Canada have warmed at __ the global average
Double
3. Which of the following provinces has the greatest per capita emissions of carbon dioxide.
Saskatchewan
4. The temperature balance of the Earth is maintained through re-radiation of long wave radiation? (True/False)
True
5. Warming ocean temperatures will result in decreasing the acidity of water? (True/False)
False
6. Institutional adaptation to climate change includes economics, laws, and policies.
True
7. List three implications of climate change on human health and infectious diseases (3 mark)
Higher incidences of water-borne diseases
Decreased food security and increased malnutrition
Increased heat related mortality
Increased health-related issues due to poor air quality
Increased emergence of infectious diseases. 
Increased natural disasters
Greater impacts on northern Canadians
Increased impact on health care systems
8. How will climate change will affect fis(3 mark)
Fish are vulnerable to changes in temperature, precipitation, wind patterns and chemicals conditions
Warmer water in fresh water systems would enhance conditions for warm-water fish but create additional stress for cold water fish.
9. List three examples of mitigation to reduces the sources or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases (3 mark)
Carbon taxes
Cap-and-Trade systems
Carbon Sequestration
Geo-engineering
New technologies 
10. The dominant limiting factor for primary production in the ocean is?
Nutrients
11. What percentage of ocean pollution originates on land?
80%
12. The majority of life in the ocean exists in the __ zone where there is sufficient light for photosynthesis.
Euphotic Zone
13. As the carbon increases, acidity declines? (True/False)
False
14. Escaped Atlantic salmon from salmon farms in the Pacific ocean are now spawning British Columbia rivers? (True/False)
True
15. Climate change could result in a slowdown of thermohaline circulation?
True
16. List three purposes of marine protected areas?
Protect endemic species
Conserve marine biodiversity and fisheries
Provide nodes of scientific research for management.
17. List three principles of Canadas ocean strategy?
Integrated management
Sustainable development
Precautionary approach
18. Define serial depletion as it applies to fishers and explain its ecological consequences?
Fish down one species, and move on to the next and so one, such as Whales 
19. The origins of agriculture date back 9000-11000 years to the _ Revolution?
Neolithic
20. Which area of the world has seen the greatest increase in demand for meat since 1960s?
Asia/China
21. The metabolic process during which cattle and bison produce methane is called?
Enteric fermentation
22. Since 1960, increased agricultural production has come primarily from increasing the amount of arable land available? (True/False)
False
23. The second law of thermodynamics is important to agricultural food changes, the longer the food chain, the greater the energy loss? (True/False)
True
24. Bioaccumulation is increase in concentrations of toxins in organisms as the pass up the food chain?
False
25. Name and define three kinds of agricultural land
Arable Land, replanting annually (5 periods)
Permanent pasture, grazing livestock. Greatest amount.
Permanent crop land, no annual replanting like coffee, tea, fruit. Least amount
26. List three of agricultural impact on global landscapes.
Interruption of biogeochemical cycles
Auxiliary energy flows
Disturbances of soil
27. List three of targets for which Brandon implements an integrated pest management plan
Mosquito control
Forestry
Landscape display
Monitoring, thresholds, treatment and evaluation requirements for each program.
28. Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada where _ is mined.
uranium
29. The largest source of electric generation in Canada is?
Hydroelectric
30. The greatest amount of coal for energy production is produced in?
Asia Pacific
31. The majority of Canada's petroleum is extracted from oil rigs offshore in the Atlantic ocean? (True/False)
False 
32. Critical zone flow resources become stock resource once regenerative capacity is exceeded? (True/False)
True
33. Although Germany produces far more solar power than Canada, Canada has far more potential to produce solar power.
True
34. List three considerations when choosing among energy sources 
Transportation
Price
Storability 
Occurrence
Energy content
Flexibility
Safety and Impact
Cleanliness and convenience
35. List three environmental issues of producing energy
Disruption of remote ecosystems
Waste heat in aquatic ecosystems from nuclear energy production
Thread to ecological and human health
Alteration of ecosystems from building hydroelectric dams
36. List three environmental concerns of fracking for natural gas
Earthquakes
Toxicity 
Groundwater contamination
Noise pollution
Large volumes of groundwater contamination
Surface pollution
37. Species become _ when they are eliminated from one part of their range.
Extirpated
38. The body responsible for assessing and recommending levels of endangerment of Canadian species is:
COSEWIC
39. 50% of endangered birds and mammals in Canada live in the?
Prairies 
40. Habitat loss is the greatest factor contributing to species-at-risk in Canad(True/False)
a.True
41. The species-at-risk act in Canada uses an adaptive management process to protect species?
a.True
42. Overharvest is one of the main drivers in the extinction vortex?
True
43. Explain the difference between consumptive and nun-consumptive use of wildlifAre these extrinsic or intrinsic values? (3 marks)
Extrinsic
Consumptive
i. Hunting
ii. Fishing
iii. Organism is harvested
Non-consumptive
i. Photography
ii. Wildlife Watching
iii. Not harvested
44. List three characteristics that make species vulnerable to extinction. (3 marks)
Endemic species
K-strategists
Migratory species
Valuable species
Species at high trophic levels
Species that clash with human activities
45. List three purposes of SARA
Create prohibitions to protect endangered species and their habitat.
Create public registry to make documents accessible to the public.
Consistent with aboriginal and treaty rights.
46. List 3 types of perpetual natural resources.
Solar
Wind
Tides
47. Sulphur dioxide emissions are a mining environmental issue? (True/False)
True
48. What year was Asbestos mining stopped in Canada?
2011
2010
2021
2008
2009
1960
49. Threats to ecological and human health are a energy environmental issue? (True/False)
True
50. Canada is the _ largest producer of gold/
5th
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
51. State 3 considerations of choosing energy sources, and give definitions.
Storability, a source that can be stored has an advantage over one that cannot.
Energy Content, the amount of usable energy by weight or volume of a given source
Price, the less expensive source or form will be preferred.
52. What is the largest 'green' power in Canada?
Hydro
53. United states has the biggest percentageof national total wind power production? (True/False)
False
54. Canada has seen as steady increase of cumulative wind power? (True/False)
True
55. List 3 disadvantages of wind power.
Wind isn't constant
Can be noisy
Habitat loss and change
56. What country has the highest solar power generation?
Germany
China
Japan
United States
EU
Canada
57. Canada has more solar power potential then the Germany? (True/False)
True
58. What is the top global oil reserves in the world?
Venezuela 
Canada
Iran
Kazakhstan
Saudi Arabia
59. Gulf of Mexico has the highest offshore petroleum? (True/False)
False
60. What percentage of oil is extracted in Canada Alberta?
84%
81%
82%
83%
85%
78%
61. Where is the most coal produced?
Asia Pacific
North America
Canada
Europe
Venezuela
62. Canada is the __ largest exporter of coal?
3rd
1st
2nd
4th
5th
63. Where in Canada is the biggest coal production?
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Nova Scotia
New Brunswick
Ontario
64. Sulphur dioxide emissions is the highest in ?
Saskatchewan
British Columbia
Alberta
Nova Scotia
Ontario
65. Nitrogen Oxide emissions is the highest in ?
Nova Scotia
British Columbia
Alberta
Saskatchewan
Ontario
66. Canada produces __ of its electricity from nuclear power, ranking Canada _ in the world.
15%, sixth
13%, fourth
15%, fifth
13%, sixth 
67. Define Ecologically extinct.
When a species exist in such low numbers, they cannot fulfill their ecological role
68. Increasing biodiversity lowers ecosystem ability to adapt. (True/False)
False
69. Bioprospecting in tropical rain forests is an economic value? (true/False)
True
70. Humans have increased the extinction rate by -- times?
1000
10
100
1100
71. List 3 main pressures causing extinction.
Habitat loss
Over harvest
pollution
72. Where has most attention been regarding extinction?
Tropical Countries
Prairies
Oceans
Swamps
73. -- accounts for -- of all species at risk in Canada
Habitat loss, 84%
Overharvest, 85%
Pollution, 84%
Overharvest, 84%
74. -- is the most important factor in causing freshwater species to be endangered.
Pollution
Overharvest
Habitat loss
Fishing
75. CITES Appendix II includes not necessarily species threatened with extinction? (True/False)
 True
76. Canada has been part of CITES since
1975
1980
1989
1970
1960
1974
77. What are 3 purposes of the SARA process
Be consistent with aboriginal and treaty rights
Require best available knowledge to be used in decision-making
Creates prohibitions to protect endangered species and their habitat
78. What percentage of protected lands are federal?
7%
10%
9%
8%
6%
79. Canada has _ protected areas?
37
39
41
40
35
80. Where is the least protection for protected areas, but has the greatest impact in Canada?
Prairies
Somewhere North
Boreal shield
Arctic